hey guys what's up it's Jess welcome
back to roots and refuge farm I'm in my
garden and today I want to share a
little tip with you guys about the most
foolproof way that I know the plant
carrots when you read lists from
gardening resources that list off super
easy to grow varieties carrots usually
don't make the cut carrots can be a
little bit tricky but that doesn't mean
that you can't grow them they're just a
few things you should know like the fact
that carrots won't germinate if it's
over 80 degrees so if you're starting to
grow these in a summer garden and you
live in a really warm place it doesn't
matter how well you sow them if it's hot
outside they're not gonna go very far
also they need to be at least 40 degrees
to germinate very well at all you need
at least a little bit of warmth to get
them up out of the ground right now I'm
sowing these carrots in February here in
zone 7 be our ground is not frozen but
it never really freezes and we've been
having a pretty mild winter however if
it does drop below freezing again the
carrots will be fine they can handle a
little bit of frost so I feel pretty
good about selling them right now for us
though we can't grow carrots through the
summer because it's far too hot they
don't develop any sort of root if
they're growing through the summer they
pretty much just developed tops and then
they go to seed putting off flowers and
seeds so they're definitely a spring and
a fall crop for me aside from a general
pickiness over at the temperature carrot
seeds themselves are just a little bit
difficult to deal with because they're
tiny teeny tiny which makes them a
little hard to space and also hard to
maneuver and it makes them very easily
misplaced you can't plant carrot seeds
very deep at all because they won't have
enough energy whenever they sprout to
make it to the soil if they're planted
too deeply and the other thing is is
they require pretty constant moisture to
germinate and it takes them with
everything being ideal circumstantially
about
11 days to come up out of the soil so as
you can see there are a lot of factors
and it still is a long termination so
you kind of have to maintain those ideal
factors for long enough so I learned a
tip I had several people suggest this
and I have found this to be the most
surefire way to sow carrot seeds to sell
your carrots you're gonna need a space
that has nice loose soil carrots will
grow in soil that is less than ideal
like if you're dealing with clay soil
but they just don't grow well and they
certainly don't grow pretty if you want
nice straight carrots that aren't forked
that don't have three legs and and all
of that you're gonna need pretty
obstruction free soil I'm growing them
in my raised beds I have really great
success growing beautiful carrots in
raised beds with good soil but if you're
growing them in the ground it can work
too but you just want to make sure your
soil is nice and and loose as possible
the other thing you're gonna need is a
board I like to use an untreated board
that really doesn't matter the size it
just depends on how many carrots you're
wanting to grow the reason why you want
it to be untreated is you're gonna set
this on top of your soil and your
seedlings your seeds as they come up to
seedlings for two weeks or so there's a
lot of yucky chemicals in treated wood
so an untreated board whatever size area
you're trying to grow carrot and what
I've done here is I've just taken this
board and pressed it into the soil so I
kind of can see an indention so I have
the size of the board in mind you can
see here I just flipped it over pressed
it in so I've got a line I know what
kind of space I'm planting here and I
just flipped it over and now I'm
actually gonna take my watering can and
water this first soils good and loose
I've raked it up a little bit with my
fingers it was already nice and prepared
for planting it was weeded and I'm gonna
go ahead and water this really well so
the soil is nice and soaked now I want
you to notice here as I'm watering this
but because it's not perfectly even
there's some run down into these areas
some runoff and that's the kind of stuff
that makes carrot sowing so difficult
because if I had
planted those seeds first and then
watered it they would have all washed
down into that area and on how to clump
a carrots come up in that one area but
the way we're gonna do it is going to
help avoid that because the thing is is
that even if you have a really great
garden you're gonna have just these tiny
little rivets in the soil that that
happens and that's one of the reasons
why this can be difficult so what I like
to do is just get my seeds in my hand
not a ton of them but enough and just go
ahead and start spacing them and I'm not
actually even putting holes what I do is
just drop the seed and just barely press
it into the ground
I'm actually not covering it I'm just
barely pressing it into the ground so
that it sort of sinks down into the soil
I'm planting these about every inch and
a half and it's really hard not to drop
more than one seed that's okay
we can send them and we will send them
as they start to germinate but we are
going to end up sending them so this is
one of the reasons why I don't like to
just just broadcast them because I like
to do as little thinning as possible and
also just like to waste as few seeds as
possible for me dropping the seeds onto
the soil that's already wet and just
pressing them down I can actually still
see them there but I'm just pressing
them down into the soil and I'm actually
gonna do that about every inch and a
half for the entire space here that I'm
gonna put this board over so if you'll
see here my planted carrots looks
something like that
they literally are just seeds that I've
pressed right down into the soil and you
can still see them the next step and
I've got a movement irrigation to scare
horse in the process of doing that so
I'm going to take this and just flip it
right over the top of the seeds that I
just planted just give it a good press
to make sure it's coming in contact with
this soil and so I remember what I've
got here stick that little marker those
are black nebula carrots now the idea of
putting this board down is that it's
gonna keep my seeds in place it's going
to keep the soil moist it's gonna keep
it from getting too hot in the Sun and
also if we get a big rain which is
forecasted for us here in the next
couple days I know that my seeds aren't
going to wash away the water will soak
into the soil it will actually help keep
the soil moist where they are but
because that board is over them it's
going to keep them from washing off now
we'll come back and check on these you
want to start checking for sprouts about
five or six days after you plant them
it's pretty unlikely for it to be that
soon but because when those sprouts do
come up they're gonna need light soon so
you don't want to risk them coming up
and then dying because they can't
photosynthesize so we're definitely
going to start checking in five or six
days I'm expecting it to probably be
more like 10 or 11 as soon as they start
sprouting well I'll just show you what
to do next when that happens I'll see
you here in a few days all right guys
it's been 16 days since the first half
of this video and I just removed my
board and I want to show you guys what
I'm seeing
okay guys see all these little sprouts
here and it was probably hard to see
exactly what you're looking at because
they're really pale since they haven't
had sunlight much yet but there are lots
and lots of sprouts coming up here
through the soil that's super exciting
great germination rates I see lots and
lots of little sprouts I just out of my
own curiosity I actually didn't make a
video about it but the day that I sowed
these underneath this board I actually
just went and sowed some the exact same
way without covering them in one of my
other beds just because I was curious to
see and I've been watching that area as
well and there I cannot find a single
germinated seed we've had a lot of rain
and so they probably got displaced or
buried too deeply let's go up to the
greenhouse really quick to talk about
this because it is very well
all right I just wanted to come in here
and talk about a few things kind of head
off some questions that I could see you
guys having I wanted this to be as clear
as possible for you first things first
you may have noticed that I had a row
cover on my garden bed had I thought
about it I probably would have shot this
video and planted these carrots in a
different garden bed just so there would
be no confusion that actually we put
that up a while after I saw these carrot
seeds I don't think that row cover had
anything to do with the success of the
germination underneath that board
however we have some really cold days
coming up I did so a lot of seeds in
that bed and now that I've removed the
board and I have those tiny little
seedlings I'm glad they have an extra
little bit of protection from the cold
but I don't want you guys watching this
video and getting through to the end
going oh man I can't so care it's like
this because I don't have row covers
that has nothing to do with the
germination I've sowed seeds under the
board's before with no row cover and
they germinate just the same as Easter
another thing that I wanted to address
was watering I have not watered those
seeds a single time since we sewed them
together 16 days ago we've had a lot of
rain Oh quite a lot of rain and even
though that board was covering those
obviously the soil was staying pretty
moist because of rainfall if at some
point you're trying this in
circumstances where your soil is drying
out and you're lifting up the first
thing that I would do is I would make
sure the board is flat on the ground and
with something like a watering can
I would water all around it really feel
like the surface of your soil needs some
moisture underneath that board lift it
up and use a spray bottle really the
whole point of the board is to keep
those seeds from being displaced and to
make sure that they stay in the right
conditions and so it defeats the purpose
if you lift it up and water it with the
hose another thing just a piece of
information that I wanted to pass on
because I had read this a while ago it's
always been in the back of my mind but
I've never felt like I needed to do this
I
read a tip when you're sowing carrots
underneath the board that if you're you
realize that they've sprouted and so
you're gonna take the board off you
don't want to leave it on too long after
they've sprouted because they'll die
they'll run out of energy they need the
sunlight but let's say you realize that
but you also realize that you have a
really big thunderstorm coming through a
rain showers coming through and you're
worried that those little delicate
seedlings are still going to be at risk
of being washed away one thing that you
can do I've never done this because I've
never felt the need to but you can take
your board and prop up the ends of it
with like some bricks or blocks or rocks
or something so essentially it's up off
the ground some inches but still over
the top of your seedlings and
essentially what that's going to do is
allow enough light in that they can live
but protect them from it and any heavy
rainfall I obviously that that would be
circumstantial that you would even need
to do that I've always just taken it off
and that's been fine but I could see
kind of being in a dilemma of being in a
place of having a lot of heavy rain but
realizing that your seedlings are making
their way up and that might be a
solution I wanted to give you guys a
case you find yourself in that situation
overall I think this is a really great
method to overcome some of the struggles
of honestly a variety of plant that is
difficult to germinate carrots can be
difficult because they're so finicky
about being not getting dry and not
getting too deep they're so easy to
misplace so I just wanted to share this
with you guys and hopefully it will
bring success to your growing endeavors
homegrown carrots really are amazing
especially compared to their
store-bought counterparts and I would
love for you guys to all get to
experience that thank you so much for
hanging out with me today I bless you
until next time
[Music]